Okay so
uh there are two people there can
someone tell me if the audio is working
this time how are we sounding
before sounding at all oh I can see a
little green
um light that wasn't or aha
I must yes could I don't know why uh the
the previous thing according to the
operating system the microphone was on
and functioning perfectly
um but here for some reason it wasn't
in a conspiratorial mood I would say
that
when I click the button that said do not
monetize YouTube has just made things
more difficult for me anyway I was also
um saying that throughout this live
stream I shall be drinking a variety of
beverages um I've been doing this this
um I've got hot things and I've got
um shake things I've been going through
this phases I have throughout my life of
just deciding to blend things because
it's far more efficient and so uh you
know throughout the day I'll have this
milk egg banana berry frozen berry
protein powder concoction thing that it
just keeps me going for hours so um yes
so apologies in advance for
um yeah drinking in front of everyone uh
been reading chapter 9 of the fabric of
reality that's the latest podcast
episode that's out
and as always with the work of David
Deutsch what tends to crop up uh things
that I didn't spot the first time around
or it prompts thoughts that on the
umpteenth reading previously I hadn't
really thought
and this time
David was explaining an issue with the
discrete and the continuous you know the
nature of our universe and it also
dawned on me in reading the section
about Quantum computation as opposed to
classical computation
classical computation apparently being
based upon classical physics that there
was already at the heart of this idea of
classical computation
a Quantum idea namely the idea of the
bit that you only had zeros and ones you
had these discrete amounts of stuff
and David points this out in the fabric
of reality
and people it struck me never actually
experience
change
we experience the illusion of change but
what in fact we experience of course and
this is an ancient philosophical idea to
some extent is we experience a
particular state
and then another state
but we don't experience the intermediate
State and insofar as we did experience
the intermediate State that's just
another state
we don't experience change we experience
some system in this state call it zero
and then some system in this state call
it state number one
but
that that gives us the illusion the
illusion of moving through these states
but of course nothing is doing the
moving I just wanted to read a small
section before I get to people's
questions because this was really what's
on my mind
from the fabric of reality with respect
uh to precisely this kind of thing
so I'm just going to put it on my other
screen over here
uh and so forgive me this is almost like
a live top cast of some extent I will be
getting to people's questions later
um but but this as I say It was kind of
a profound thought that it jogged in my
memory from ancient ideas of philosophy
and David wrote here and this is chapter
nine fabric of reality the classical
theory of computation which was the
unchallenged foundation of computing for
half a century is now obsolete like the
rest of classical physics as an
approximation scheme the theory of
computation is now the quantum theory of
computation okay so of course he's not
saying there that the classical theory
of computation is obsolete in the sense
of actually being able to produce
technology of course not saying that if
you want to have a deeper understanding
of reality and make progress on these
questions of how to come to an
understanding of reality in terms of
physics and computation
the classical theory is obsolete there's
no point trying to pursue ever more
deeply the mathematics of classical
computation Theory that's not going to
enable you to make progress because the
theory of computation is quantum
computation
it goes on to say I said that theory had
I said that Turing had implicitly used
quantum mechanics in his construction
but with the benefit of hindsight we can
now see that even the classical theory
of computation did not fully conform to
classical physics and it contained
strong
adjubrations of quantum theory it is no
coincidence that the word bit meaning
the smallest possible amount of
information that a computer can
manipulate means essentially the same as
Quantum a discrete chunk
discrete variables variables that cannot
take a continuous range of values are
alien to classical physics
for example if a variable has only two
possible values say zero and one how
does it ever get from zero to one
In classical physics it would have to
jump
discontinuously which is incompatible
with how forces in motion work in
classical mechanics in quantum physics
no discontinuous change is necessary
even though all measurable quantities
are discrete it works as follows Okay so
this is curious in quantum physics no
discontinuous change is necessary but we
only have discrete quantities of things
so how the heck do we ever go from one
quantity to another
there has to be this concept of motion
and change with time how can change
happen if you can't pass through the
intermediate States so to speak
continuously continuously or can you can
you do that
okay so all measurable quantities are
discrete
how can you have continuous change
because you can't have discontinuous
change David says
let us start by imagining some parallel
universes stacked like a pack of cards
with the pack as a whole representing
the Multiverse such a model in which the
universes are arranged in a sequence
greatly understates the complexity of
the Multiverse but it suffice us to
illustrate my point here pausing there
um when we say that the universes are
stacked into this deck of cards we also
have to imagine they're infinitely thin
it's a Continuum it's a Continuum so
this already is going to be misleading
but what else can you do if you're
trying to explain something that is
beyond the experience of people you we
don't have an experience of the
Multiverse from the outside so I'm
trying to picture it let's picture the
deck of cards where each card represents
a universe the universe with a slice
it's infinitely thin anyway let's keep
going
now let us alter the model to take count
of the fact that the Multiverse is not a
discrete set of universes but a
Continuum and not all universes are
different okay also there not all the
universes are different and indeed for
any given Universe such as the one that
you occupied now that's the one that I
occupy now there is an infinite number
that are absolutely identical fungible
and when events happen Quantum events in
particular then the universe has
differentiate they become different but
each of those different universes
themselves have an infinite number of
fungible instances a smaller measure so
there's a smaller measure of them but
you can't count them because they're
uncountably infinite so this is the way
we get over this the mathematics Works
don't worry about it
um
so as he says for each Universe present
there is also a Continuum of identical
universes present that's the fungibility
comprising a certain Tiny But non-zero
proportion of the Multiverse yes so even
though it's still an infinite number of
fungible instances of of Any Given
Universe it can still be infinite but
infinitely small compared to the other
massively large infinities
in our model this proportion may be
represented by the thickness of the cart
okay so the proportion of universes is
represented by the thickness of the card
where each card now represents all the
universes
of a given type however unlike the
thickness of the card the proportion of
each type of universe changes with time
under quantum mechanical Laws of Motion
consequently the proportion of universe
is having a given property also changes
and it changes continuously
again the proportion of universe is
having a given property also changes and
it changes continuously so this is going
to explain how it is that we have these
discrete values in computation able to
move from one kind to another
he says
in the case of a discrete variable
changing from zero to one imagine the
variable has the value of zero in all
universes before the change begins
and then after the change it has the
value 1 in all universes
so this is the this is the way we're
going to get this change having both
discrete value in every single Universe
it either is zero or one
but there's a number of universes an
infinite number a Continuum of universes
within this range and they're going to
change one at a time that's infinite of
them okay so it's a continuous change
that's happening in the Multiverse in
any given Universe it's either zero one
which means that any observer in the
universe only ever sees zero or one
hence only ever experiences zero or one
and not the change because the change is
happening at the multiversal level okay
of course you would have the memory of
course you're going to have the memory
if you're in the universe with one that
it was in fact zero it's just you won't
see how it got there so to speak it just
it just happens it just happens it's the
flick of the switch if you like
if this is not mysterious to you great
it's mysterious to me it was mysterious
to me until reading this thing again
um
so he says just to recap in the case of
a discrete variable changing from zero
to one suppose that the variable has the
value in zero in all universes before
the change and then it has the value one
and all universes after the change
during the change the proportion of
universes in which the value is zero
Falls smoothly from 100 to zero and the
proportion in which the value is one
rises correspondingly from zero to one
hundred percent
it might seem that although the
transition from zero to one is
objectively continuous from the
Multiverse perspective it remains
subjectively good discontinuous from the
point of view of any individual universe
um however that is merely a uh yeah he's
talking about a diagram there so that's
the point I think that's that that's my
punch line here is that although the
change is happening continuously from
the perspective of the Multiverse
in any one Universe it's a discrete
change this is the Quantum aspect
subjectively for from the subjective
perspective what's the subjective
Multiverse perspective the subjective
Universe perspective our perspective
this perspective of a single person an
observer there's no special physics
applying to The Observer it's just that
the Observer only occupies a tiny
proportion in fact strictly we might say
uh a a class of universes all of which
are exactly the same the fundable
universes in which you yourself find
yourself you will find yourself in the
state zero and then you will find
yourself in the state one and you go
well how did I get from zero to one
given that there is no intermediate
state for us to pass through not for you
but for the universe for the Multiverse
as a whole the proportion of universes
is changing steadily from none of them
are in the states one and all of them
are in state zero to continuously the
proportion of them change to the state
one at some point into in at the
intermediate point of exactly the
halfway point half of the universes will
be in the state zero otherwise being
identical in all of their respects and
half of the universes will be in the
state one otherwise identical in all
respects and then continue the change
until they're all in state one this is
what it means for the state to have
changed from zero to one but you being
in one of those universes will only ever
be either experiencing the state zero or
the state one okay maybe that's not
profound to everyone else but to me this
this goes to the heart of quantum theory
and and reconciling our understanding of
the discrete and the continuous within
this multiversal model how it is that
motion is possible and that kind of
thing okay
right but but it also it also goes to
the heart of the mystery about
what not doesn't tell us what
Consciousness is but how Consciousness
has this inherently single Universe
aspect to it or at least that you're in
this proportion you're not don't occupy
the entire Multiverse you occupy this
tiny sliver of the Multiverse and you
are observing
particular States and then observing
other states as I began this discussion
with and not the intermediate States
okay so that's what I wanted to talk
about with that
um I noticed now that in looking at
Twitter I can now see how many times a
particular tweet has been viewed
I suppose that's uh to some extent
useful
certainly there's been rapid inter
iterations being made at
Twitter
I like experimentation I suppose rapid
experimentation but one wants to have
time to
reflect on the changes to figure out
whether or not they've been of benefit
and so on and so forth but since a lot
of changes are being made at the moment
so if Elon is trying to figure out okay
is this generating a better customer
experience user experience
um how do you know if you're asking
people how satisfied they are with the
overall experience if there's a
multitude of different changes and
there's one particular change that you
don't like then that's a feature of
human psychology you tend to reflect
more heavily on the thing you don't like
than the thing you you do like so for
example at the moment I kind of I like
the fact that I can see the number of
views of the Tweet but on the other hand
I wanted to be able to have the facility
too as I do in content creator and
posting videos to post longer videos so
I'd always had Twitter blue so it was
called then they changed Twitter blue so
the Twitter blue the thing that allows
you to
publish longer videos
also comes packaged with the blue tick
and I don't want the Blue Tick I think
the Blue Tick is is a silly idea
um you know it just creates two classes
of people on Twitter you know the payers
and the non-payers okay that so there
were there already they were there
already but why are we telling everyone
now I don't I don't I just don't get
that I so I don't want the Blue Tick but
I have the Blue Tick now seemingly out
of necessity because I I want the other
features that come with the paid model
so anyway the point is if you're making
rapid changes
um many many rapid changes that seem to
be going on right now it can become more
difficult as any experiment is you're
changing many many variables uh when you
should be just changing one sitting back
reflecting uh Gathering the data that
you want and then go on and make the
other change
I don't know what extent this is this is
happening right now Perhaps it is
um the James West Space Telescope has
been as always releasing more exciting
stuff another thing I want to talk about
and big deals are made about well
they're finding
um
um planets in the habitable zone seven
planets in the habitable zone
um this habitable zone thing is over
egged uh quite often by a
astrobiologist I think it's it's the
equivalent of Click bait in the
astronomy World habitable zone planets
what is the habitable zone the habitable
zone is just that region around the Sun
where on the surface of the planet you
could have liquid water any closer to
the host star and the liquid water is
going to boil
any further away from the Hostile uh the
liquid water is going to freeze well
what we already know what we already
what we already know about
um astronomy even within our own solar
system uh the moon of Europa you know
has we think it's solid on the surface
it's well outside the habitable zone of
the Sun
but there are good geophysical theories
that say but there might be a liquid
ocean of water underneath which could
have an ecosystem could support an
ecosystem all you need for something
like that is a an internal source of
heat which something like the Earth has
by the way and Mars would have and Venus
would have and all this sort of stuff
and you know Venus would say completely
inhospitable but I don't know how deep
down under the ground you need to go on
on Venus before it's cool enough okay
you go too far to the core of Venus and
it's going to be just as hot as the
Earth but is there is there a midpoint
somewhere there where life could be
supported underground okay so you're not
going to find civilizations but if we're
talking about habitable habitable by
life of any kind well you can be closer
to the Sun and further away from the Sun
than the habitable zone defined as where
the liquid water is and yet still have
liquid water because there will be other
ways of having that liquid water there
otherwise you know by simply the
internal mechanics of a particular
planet it namely radioactive decay of
the core which is what's going on in the
earth if you move the Earth
you know way out to where Jupiter is
sure complex life will die bacteria Will
Survive and the bacteria Will Survive
even if the Earth freezes over because
deep under the ground it's warm and it's
on and deep under the ground it's warm
not because of the Sun but rather
because of the radioactive reactive
Decay that's going on of uranium
primarily down there and the heat left
over from the formation of the planet
five and a half billion years ago that's
also the reason why the core of the
earth is hot and it's cooling down over
time so habitable zone stuff there's
also a habitable zone interestingly if
you're interested in this kind of thing
of the Galaxy and the universe the
galaxy has a habitable zone too close to
the center of the Galaxy too much
radiation uh stars get too close
together so the orbits won't be stable
you won't have habitable planets because
they're likely to crash into each other
they won't last very long there's too
much radiation there anyway baking the
surface of any Planet that's near the
the center of uh of the Galaxy further
away from the center of the Galaxy you
actually have a problem with what's
called metallicity uh that there's not
as there's not the great variety of
elements out there the nuclei of the
elements out there are are lighter and
this is related to the idea that you
have a habitable zone in the universe as
well if we find planets that are
extremely distant from the earth let's
say billions of light years away we've
got no hope of seeing them by the way
but but if you could say plant the first
planets forming which would be Jupiter
like planets
um around Stars the first generation of
stars you wouldn't have life there why
wouldn't you have life there because of
necessity those planets are forming out
of the same staff
that the Big Bang produced which is only
hydrogen and helium so you would have a
star Stars can form perfectly well out
of that any planets that form are also
going to be like that made out of
hydrogen helium big gas giants like
Jupiter and you're not going to have
flying bats or anything like that in the
atmosphere of those planets why because
what would they be made out of
they can't be made out of carbon because
there was no carbon in that at that time
hadn't been produced yet there was no
oxygen there was no silicon there was
nothing except hydrogen and helium Trace
Amounts of lithium so there's a
habitable zone in the universe as well
habitable zone in the Galaxy comes down
to the site by the way I mentioned
metallicity because this is the word
astronomers use for any element that is
heavier than than helium everything else
is a metal to an astronomer I know the
chemists disagree
um
uh I had a few things on uh my list here
oh yes I was listening to Jordan
Peterson talking about
the people who talk about people and
people who talk about things and and I
just found that that really interesting
his reflection on these two classic
people often he brings it down to uh
gender gender roles per year certain
females are more likely to talk about
people and males are more likely to talk
about things but it's certainly not a
strict divide there are people out there
and you I tend to see this on Twitter
the people who are talking about other
people people who are engaged in giving
lots of advice seemingly and the people
who were just going on and and getting
involved in doing the thing commenting
on the things out there
um of course both types are important
you know some people need uh guidance
and advice and all that kind of stuff
um whereas other people seem to be able
to just get on and do stuff without
needing too much advice of course you
don't know what anyone's personal
situation is but the measure of the
things you know that an old Bible
passage you will know them by their
fruits you see people being
highly productive and and doing lots of
stuff they tend not to be the people
giving life advice it's it's the you
know doctor here myself kind of thing
the the person who's got 10 ways in
order to be more productive
is often the person who is what's called
projecting it's like these are not so
much routines that you personally have
your your 10 ways of being more
productive these seem to be aspirations
that you have for yourself
because often you know I will look at 10
ways to be more productive you know not
exactly that but that kind of thing you
know what I mean and think to myself
yes isn't this Common Sense isn't it
well why is this a revelation to you
this is the way in which you get things
done okay
um okay I'll go to the uh oh one final
thing I was listening to
um Jonathan height on the most recent
episode of the Tim Ferriss podcast Tim
Ferriss podcast is a great podcast and
they're talking about morality
and Jonathan height uh has views on
different systems of Morality In us
calls uh like everyone else who speaks
in the space
um seems to me to miss the point that
it's the point that David Deutsch makes
about morality which is morality like
science is a system for solving problems
that's it okay you can have your
scientific theory general relativity
allows you to solve problems uh
evolution by natural selection will
actually solve problems the theory of
combustion using oxygen allows you to
solve problems etc etc etc okay so you
have these scientific theories but you
don't say you know I am a general
relativist and I I tend to use general
relativity to solve all the problems in
science so ludicrous it's absurd
but in Morality people do pick a theory
they say I'm a utilitarian and that's it
I use this Theory to solve everything
the critical idea of knowledge is that
every single theory in science or
anywhere else serves as a criticism of
other stuff it's explanatory of course
ideally that's what you want you don't
just want a predictive account of things
you want an explanation as to why the
world is doing what it's doing but once
you have that explanatory Theory it
serves the criticism of everything else
so quantum theory sits there as a
criticism of classical physics
and it wins in that battle of ideas
classical physics serves the criticism
of you know John Smith walking down the
road who's got his own theory of how to
get Rockets to the Moon
using his propulsion system well
Newton's physics will tell you that his
is wrong and it can be ruled out by
experiment and Newton's Theory would win
that battle but put Newton's theory of
gravity in a battle with general
relativity and they're critiquing each
other and it's general relativity that
wins out that battle for solving almost
any problem unless of course you just
need something that's efficient very
quickly done back of the envelope type
thing then maybe Newton's physics wins
that wins for the heuristic reason okay
for for easier understanding the easier
way of launching your ballistic missile
let's say
but in Morality the rules are changed in
Morality we people identify with
particular theories especially these
days the effect of altruism type people
and uh utilitarians of almost every kind
they want to mathematize these things in
some way shape or form I was listening
to to Hype talk about this with with Tim
Ferriss just Morality In general there's
nothing particularly the height said
that I objected to but it got me
thinking about
um a Jocko willink one time the the Navy
SEAL has got his own podcast which I
always recommend to people
and he was asked One Time by one of his
bosses before he went to ramadi in Iraq
where he led the Navy Seals in the
battle for ramadi
um during the Iraq and one of his bosses
asked him or advised him you know make
sure you think about for any Mission you
go on whether or not it will be worth
losing one of your men over
and so this is what his boss advised him
you know so you're basically saying you
know don't go out on a mission if you
think you might lose someone if you
think it's not worth losing one of your
people over in other words he was doing
the utilitarian calculus is this worth
doing
Jocko's response was
basically sir it doesn't matter what the
mission is no Mission will be worth me
losing any man over
now that would seem to cause him to be
impotent in the face of doing anything
while he was in Iraq
fighting terrorists and fighting
Warlords and so on and so forth
but he's not a utilitarian he's not
doing that calculus he then went on to
speak about duty but it is my duty to do
this we have accepted this Mission this
is our job and this is what we are going
to do there will always be a risk of
losing someone always
but the measure of the mission is not
whether or not it's possible or we think
we might lose someone but rather whether
we do the job which is quite right so
this isn't now other people will come
along and say oh yes but really really
you can do the utilitarian calculus from
the God's eye perspective you know it's
it's better that Jocko goes and does the
mission and you know
the point is as a matter of practicality
as a matter of practicality Jocko is not
making the utilitarian calculus what
does it have to do with anything I ever
talk about well when it comes to AGI
right and Ai and people trying to
program in the ethics for the AI which I
think is a ridiculous idea anyway it
always comes down to this you know
utilitarian calculus of some kind and
yet people it appears to be a people
engaged in manners of life and death are
not making that calculation how would
you make that calculation anyway
okay so all of that said
now I will go to um questions and
people's feedback and that kind of thing
and one of the things that's come up
is of course
um uh AGI and Ai and chat GPT and
um that kind of thing so I'm just
looking at Twitter now
Arjun of course
um
has said
topic suggestion chat GPT and ago
so
um interestingly
um uh you know this is my side hustle I
shouldn't say that so making podcasts is
one of my hustles there are there are
things I do in life okay so this is the
the public-facing part of me the one of
the other things one of the other tasks
I'm I shouldn't say tasks I'm really
enjoying it but I am in the fortunate
very fortunate position of being able to
learn precisely about this thing a few
of us were absolutely fascinating and
pressed Amazed by the capacity of chat
GPT to do what it does
and all wanted to find out and others
wanted to find out and so we are
building a thing to explain how this
thing does what it does
can't say much more about where that's
happening when it's going to be released
or anything like that but it's going on
so I've been doing the work of trying to
figure out
the technical details
that sit behind chat GPT in particular
because chat GPT
uses this
new mode of
generating predictions
it uses this thing called the
self-attention Transformer which is a
highly mathematical very
sophisticated way of
waiting certain guesses that I might say
guesses with the the Proviso they're not
genuine guesses
there are two things to say about the
way chat gbt and self-attention networks
work okay there were these things called
recurrent neural networks which were
able to make predictions but they didn't
work well for things like language
translation
a group of very smart people
um published a paper called attention is
all you need also called the Transformer
people
and people have been using this
Transformer this this new algorithm this
new way of waiting stuff in order to
gen create things like chat GPT the
reason why chat GPT is so good this is
not a full explanation but the reason
why it is is because this thing called
the self-attention Transformer
that sits behind it it's the algorithm
behind it but that's not all that's just
the algorithm
you need to give the algorithm something
so what do you give the algorithm
massive amounts of data and when I say
massive amounts of data it is
difficult to imagine the amount of data
one of the earlier this is not chat GP
but an earlier iteration using gpt3
which was a which also led to a
particular impressive chat Bots that
earlier version which was not as
impressive as chat GPT
it used something like 42 terabytes of
data okay so 42 terabytes yeah we know
what a terabyte is you buy you know it
disk drives SD drives and DD drives hard
drives over on the terabyte size this is
42 terabytes of text of text no images
not moving like a text
this is what it was trained on that's a
phenomenal amount of of textual data I
did the calculation just for fun as I
was researching the stuff
if you had regular Bibles
regular sized you know New Testament and
Old Testament Bibles
and you had a
I was using feed because I was talking
to Americans and if you had a six foot
tall by nine foot wide bookshelf
and you filled that bookshelf with
Bibles
and then you had another bookshelf
behind that separated from the first
bookshelf by two feet and you filled
that one up with Bibles
repeat that process for something like
25 miles and you'll have that amount of
data 42 terabytes something like that
okay I might get the number slightly
wrong but it is in the order of
uh 30 miles something like that of
bookshelves filled with Bibles
phenomenal and apparently this chat GPT
one is much much bigger than this
they're very cagey about precisely how
much data was used
but this is the reason why it's
impressive so why is it impressive okay
so it's got this algorithm this
self-attention algorithm behind it
which it uses partial differential
equations it uses uh probabilistic
assumptions it's discussing on Bayesian
thing that
uh it's impressive it's an impressive
piece of mathematics
um but it but but it remains with
mathematics not self-aware or anything
like this so what does it do
there are very few good
popular accounts of how this thing works
to some extent I've come to think myself
that no one really knows precisely how
it works and this is not uncommon by the
way especially in the field of coding
phenomenally
um yeah the the programs of alphago the
thing that beat the program the beat the
the players of go
were unable to account for how it made
the moves that it did
okay so they didn't know how it worked
that just means they don't know it
doesn't mean that it's doing anything
magical or literally intelligent they
didn't know okay
in the same way it appears as though the
from the accounts you read out there you
want to get really really technical
mathematical accounts super abstract
accounts or
um just yeah just accounts that um are
perhaps too superficial of this
self-attent the Transformer okay the
attention is all you need paper how this
thing works
I likened it too what they do with this
vast amount of data this vast amount of
them there's 42 terabytes of text used
by the chat GP team more than that more
than that okay the the previous version
of chat the chat bot
and what chat gbt now does is it builds
uh an abstract space of relationships
between words and phrases and MD
paragraphs
and the landscape is literally like a
landscape it it has the analog of
mountains and rivers the mountain might
be an example I used was you might have
a mountain that sort of represents cats
the concept of cats
um
you know and it's got faces like teeth
and fangs and it's got leopards on one
side and limes on the other and it's
this big thing and so related to that
it's all the concepts related to cats
and next to it is like the the mountain
of dogs and and and all the different
species of dogs and the features of dogs
and then you've got this huge mountain
range of mammals
part of more mountain ranges which are
animals in general and then life in
general is this huge continent of stuff
and then you've got this ocean of
abstract Notions about mathematics and
so on and so forth and it just becomes
this world of data with features that it
builds and by the way this training you
feed all this data this massive amount
of textual data into the algorithm that
chat GPT runs
and it takes a long time
for to learn all this going it feeds
output and then it takes back input it's
got forward propagation and backward
propagation so they call it training
this thing over a long time eventually
at the end it gets this model this
abstract space
of existing knowledge because the
existing body of knowledge is just like
a library it's a stuff we already know
and given that it can then extrapolate
and interpolate and produce things that
fit in the landscape
it can make up something that isn't in
the landscape but fits in the landscape
it appears to fit in the landscape it
resembles stuff that's already there in
the landscape
do you know what I mean and so
this is a new mode of doing stuff it
seems to me this is the way I've
explained it to myself because those
accounts aren't out there this idea of
generating this abstract space this
landscape of of Concepts
um
but what we can say about that because
people ask about AGI as impressive as
that is that building of the landscape
and the providing the illusion
of an actual entity there having a
conversation with you intelligently
there's a big difference between that
kind of thing
and an AGI or a person
who can gain escape velocity from the
landscape and say something that is
completely
a new world
altogether a new world
if
the chat bot if chat GPT has no
knowledge whatsoever of Constructor
Theory it's not going to come up with it
but of course it does anything that's
out there anything that's been published
just about almost anything that's been
published will somehow rather be in chat
gbt's memory but it's not going to solve
um new problems that no one's had before
it might solve a problem that you
personally have why because someone else
might have solved that problem before
and so we can just grab that solution
and give it to you which is why people
are also saying chat GPT is a new form
of search engine Google does the same
thing but no one's tempted to attribute
to Google intelligence
but they but they they attempted to
attribute to chat gbt some kind of
intelligence
because
it's crafting sentences that fit into
the landscape of sentences that already
exist
but it just won't come up with anything
entirely
brand new okay I won't solve Humanity's
problems
whereas people will so that's a stark
difference
okay so that's that's my thoughts on
chat gbt and AGR for from Arjun
Ron Ronald
uh Ronald has asked talk about the
simulation Theory and the Penrose
argument about the universe not starting
with a bank bang I don't know what you
mean about the simulation Theory uh
unless you just mean the simulation
hypothesis that Bostrom comes up with
I've talked about this before at the
risk of I guess boring people
um I'm repeating myself
um
the idea is that let me just give you
bostrom's argument
um
at some point in the distant future
our computational capacity will be so
great that we will be able to simulate
within our computer's whole worlds
we can already do this to some extent
with you know pick up Microsoft flight
simulator it's a simulation of the world
to some degree of fidelity
um you know the Sims that game is is a
simulation of the world to some degree
of fidelity you can imagine in the
distant future we'll be able to simulate
the whole world to High Fidelity and if
you're simulating the world to higher
fidelity
then in that world you're simulating the
goings-on of matter doing absolutely
anything presumably you'd need a quantum
computer for this or perhaps not but
inside of that computer if it's
a very very good representative
representation of the actual World it
will have people in it because the world
has people in it and so there's people
wandering around inside this simulated
World okay well done that's a physically
possible thing to do at some point in
the world in the future because we
already know that the laws of physics
are computable so anything that happens
in physical reality can be put inside of
a computer that includes thinking people
okay so you've got a a planet Earth
let's say you could have a universe or
galaxy whatever
in your computer well if it's a good
simulation of the world and it's got
people in it and those people have
computers
and on their computers they too could
run simulations of Worlds with people
who have computers who can run
simulations of Worlds with people with
computers and so on it goes into this
fractal type thing where it's just
um there's only one base reality only
one base reality physical reality and
then everything else is similar and so
bostrom's argument is buyer uh by
probability probabilistic methods
um where would you expect to be if you
pick yourself out of a random universe
is it a simulated one or the base real
one
well he thinks the way to solve this is
to say well you should expect to be in a
simulation but it's the wrong way of
course to to cap these things up these
things are uncountable we live in a
Multiverse by the way
so which one are you in
um which branch of the Multiverse are
you in the one where it's been simulated
or the one where it's not been simulated
we're already comparing uh uncountably
infinite numbers of things
but besides that if we are in a
simulation
as I said just as recently as the last
episode of topcast in fact if we are in
a simulation
then that doesn't solve anything at all
we want to know when I say we people who
are interested in the foundational
questions about existence
want to know what the ultimate
constituents of reality are we also
simultaneously know we can't get there
but we want to know this is our is our
aim is what we're aiming for the answers
to our deepest questions so if you just
say oh we're being simulated on a
computer running somewhere Another
Universe we just want to immediately ask
what are the laws of physics like in
that universe
oh well that's also a simulation okay
well forget about okay once you get out
of the simulation what are the laws of
physics like in the universe that's not
being simulated that's my real question
and why do they have that form and yeah
Etc
so it doesn't solve anything for us for
us people who are interested in answers
to questions don't just Palm us off with
oh look here's an interesting way to
avoid answering the question it's
exactly like exactly like people saying
don't worry about it God created at all
and you'll find out when you die well
it's not a solution to anything that
doesn't satisfy our curiosity that's
palming someone off it's saying we don't
know why reality is the way it is
consider this
but it's just not an answer better to
just say we don't know right now but I
would say
um it's not a simulation because that's
a bad explanation it's it's it's too
easily varied there's no state of the
world in which we can ever rule that out
it sure it's fun to think about but you
know it's fun to think about as I like
to say and one of my philosophy
lecturers used to say Everything You
observe and all the laws of physics and
all the explanations you have are
perfectly consistent with the idea that
universe that reality all of reality is
just coming to existence right now
and with your memories intact and any
moment it can wink out of existence too
okay so that's just as profound a
thought as a simulation argument to my
mind who cares
it doesn't allow us to make progress is
the is the main point about all that
stuff
okay so thank you Ron oh the Penrose
argument about the universe not starting
with a bang yeah I went to a lecture
where Roger Penrose was at the Sydney
Opera House of all places one of my good
friends took me a year decades ago now
um and he talked about this and it was a
very interesting idea you know Roger Ben
Rose Nobel Prize winner mathematics
um physics I think but you know
mathematician uh essentially and
his idea was the Hindu type idea
the idea of the universe existing in
infinite Cycles
um
it's you know it's theoretical it's
better than the simulation argument
because there's sort of observations
that kind of suggest that
well I wouldn't say suggest but he's
trying to explain actual observations
actual problems
so what he says is well look
if our current observational data uh is
correct universe is expanding not only
expanding but accelerating in its
expansion this is the way I remember it
anyway
um then what you have towards the end of
time trillions of years hence
is
a universe where everything is expanded
away from everyone everything else and
from any observer's perspective let's
say you're here on Earth
trillions of years from now then all the
other galaxies have expanded away from
the Milky Way okay let's just make this
simple the stars are still alive of
course they're not the status of long
since died but if you're there somehow
you're you're an artificial intelligence
you've managed as artificial general
intelligence you've managed to put
yourself into some sort of robotic form
so no matter what happens to the Sun and
everything else in the entire universe
the matter you're made out of is
extremely robust and you you have
survived trillions of years
the universe has expanded spice is
expanding the Galaxies have expanded
away from you eventually it comes to a
point because of dark energy that the
dark energy expansion will pull apart
even the planet Earth will pull apart
begin pulling apart molecules uh begin
pulling apart subatomic particles uh
what do you get when you pull apart
subatomic particles and you destroy
matter you have to conserve the energy
so what's left is just photons nothing
but photons so the very end of the
universe because of the expansion of
space due to Dark Energy rips apart all
matter into nothing but photons so all
you're observing is photons
when else did you only ever observe
photons the Big Bang at the Big Bang at
the moment of the universe is coming
into existence and so this is penrose's
kind of idea this is my butchering of
penrose's idea but that's the basic
concept and it's consistent with
observation
we know that the Universe began hot with
nothing but photons
We Know by which I mean
our best explanations now
are that there is this thing Dark Energy
there is this accelerating expansion and
the expansion will continue forever
there's no Force to stop the expansion
and so given that State of Affairs and
the accelerating expansion everything
will be ripped apart in some trillions
of years time and so the end of the
universe comes to resemble in some way
the beginning of the universe so
clocks don't seem to make sense at that
time there's nothing to keep time at the
end of the universe
so do you just get another kind of
beginning does it just all begin again
this was Penrose kind of idea I don't
understand the subtleties but this is
the basic concept we began with photons
we end with photons there was no time at
the beginning there was no time at the
end maybe it's all a big cycle like the
Hindu religion suggested
uh yeah
take that for what you like now
the other thing to say about that is of
course with dark energy
predictions deduction logical deductions
from Dark Energy observations that we
have right now we don't know the nature
of dark energy
we do know that the universe is
accelerating its expansion
we we have to talk about what's going to
happen in trillions of years right
because in billions of years the
universe is just going to be bigger uh
if you're in the Milky Way things will
look roughly the same you have to think
in terms of trillions of years before
you get radical change to the structure
of the large-scale structure of the
universe
and so what we say about that as well
what do we always say about that you
know this is prophecy to try and predict
something even if it is coming from good
physical theories because we don't know
what knowledge we will create before
then can we figure out something that
would be able to take advantage of this
dark energy and reverse it in some way
perhaps perhaps we don't know we don't
know what's going to happen in a
thousand years let alone trillions so am
I worried about the expansion of the
universe into uh absolute nothing
maximum entropy nothing but photons no
because problems are soluble and we
don't know that there's a physical law
standing in our way of preventing this
kind of thing from happening okay and
somehow
Gathering the energy that's in the
universe there's a lot of energy in the
universe to prevent this accelerating
expansion we know what's causing the
accelerating expansion maybe once we do
we can reverse it
um
uh someone says just finished reading
universality chapter on Boi I'm not 100
clear on what makes some exploration
Universal and not others the idea of
universality is just that a well one way
of looking at it is a particular system
or machine can do all tasks
that
all other specialized systems or
machines
able to perform a similar tasks could do
so it's it's it's it's a thing that can
do everything
in a particular class of stuff so the
the the English alphabet is universal
for making words it doesn't matter what
the concept is doesn't matter if you
invent a new chemical or a new idea the
English language is universal for being
able to
put letters together into words to
capture that idea okay there's nothing
you can think of that can't be put in to
words to some extent
but just because uh you can't you you
can't do it doesn't mean it can't be
done in principle is what we're saying
okay sometimes we have inexplicit ideas
and we can't put it into words because
we don't yet have the knowledge of how
to do it but the English language is
such that it can represent anything that
can be represented in language
um
whatever computers are the other kind of
universality we often talk about a
computer a universal computer is a
device that can perform the function of
any other computer okay so if you've got
a specialized computer that can only do
addition the universal computer can do
that if you had a specialized computer
that can do nothing but run flight
simulators or your Universal computer
can do that so this is what Universal
means yeah
um what makes some things not Universal
uh well
again I'll just hark back to my previous
podcast
um
uh curiously you know David was talking
about the anti-kissra mechanism this
two two and a half thousand year old
um device that was found
um Greek in origin ancient Greek and
origin made a very sophisticated finely
machined cogs
and the best current theory is that it
was used as a way of predicting to very
high Precision the motion of objects in
the sky
even eclipses even down to eclipses so
this is a special purpose computer
analog computer a special purpose
computer
and
so but but any universal computer could
do that job as well predict the position
of of planets I had the thought I don't
know this is true but the anti-kits are
a mechanism it's an interesting idea
that it as the Terry free whatever his
name was the the fellow the scientist
that
actually has done the most work on
figuring out what this thing is and how
it works and so on
um
sort of
he talked about how it was a it could be
a military type device you know probably
Top Secret in some way shape or form
uh you know be like the nuclear weapon
of the time or the quantum computer of
the time perhaps
if it was if it was this exceedingly
expensive and rare bit of Technology
which it may have been because it's not
like we're finding them everywhere you
know in the archaeological record
there's one example of it
um 2 000 plus year old computer
uh
then if you're the the leader at the
time
would you use it to keep yourself in
power would you use it for nefarious
reasons would others who've figured out
that secret knowledge at some point uh
even just ignoring the anti-chither
mechanism if you've figured out how to
predict the motion of planets
you're you've got access to an
astronomer who knows enough about this
stuff
do you use it to keep the population in
control how would you do that well you
tell the population hey tomorrow at you
know 2 p.m the moon is going to be
covered by the sun if you could do that
2 000 years ago that's a pretty
impressive fee no one else can do that
it appears as though you can do magic it
appears as though you've got access to
the gods good way to keep yourself in
power in ancient times of course now we
know
being in our culture of criticism that
um we know there's no magic we know that
the leaders don't have access to the
gods but back then
perhaps not perhaps people were less
critical
so yeah any kind of knowledge of that
sort is going to be of great use
to prospective dictators and so on
um
Rob has asked can every proof by
contradiction also be shown without
contradiction I guess so I'm not sure
this is a mathematical question really
um
but it would come down to uh
there must be other routes to getting
for any for any proof
there must be multiple routes to getting
there so I would say the answer is
simply yes okay
um
you know you can imagine a proof by
contradiction of the Pythagoras Theorem
there are hundreds of proofs of
Pythagoras Theorem whatever can be
proved one way there must be more than
one way of getting there I would guess
um
what else have we got
Russian Ali has asked um hardware and
software of the brain in the context of
mental illness this is the favorite one
that comes up quite often
so I'm not a great proponent of this
concept of
um illness being applied to the mind
I think it's a category error because
one is the abstract
and the other is the physical and
illness
uh probably considered as a
malfunction of something physical in
your body this is why you go to the
doctor okay there's no amount of
thinking that can get you through this
thing
um you know the bacterial infection is a
physical problem
um the the the amputated arm is a
physical problem okay so it's not an
illness but you take my meaning the high
blood pressure the whatever these are
these are things that you can
objectively measure
using some instrument
um in case of the amputated arm of
course you can see the thing but I mean
you know blood pressure
um viral load there's going to be some
device some measurement you can take so
you've got an illness here's the is the
objective sign that everyone can agree
now
when it comes to the mind the mind is
the thing that creates ideas and that
can go wrong sure
but to call that also an illness
I think it's conflating different levels
of analysis we can say that people have
bad systems of thought absolutely
absolutely we can
and the things that lead to depression
or cause people to be more quick to
anger
um
but
yeah I think that that
um in general what we're talking about
when it comes to so-called mental
illness is a problem of software that
there are certain people for example who
become angry more easily than others
and you might call this mental illness
you know
um
my guess is though it often comes down
to bad ideas here's a here's a classic
case like we just don't know what the
relationship between alcohol and people
suddenly erupting into anger happens to
be
but
you know I can certainly imagine that
two people who otherwise have the same
kind of experience with the same
quantity of alcohol have the same
Sensations and feelings and all that
kind of stuff
can nonetheless Express the
different degrees of
uh uh anger when the angry thing when
the when the thing that annoys them
happens
it has nothing to do with genetics it
has nothing to do with the alcohol as
such it has everything to do with the
ideas what they're thinking about the
sensations they're having while they're
drunk and angry at the same time one of
them realize oh I'm drunk oh that's
annoying oh I better sit back because
I'm drunk and reflect on this that's a
whole bunch of ideas that they have and
the other person doesn't doesn't have
the idea that their ideas are warped by
feeling angry and alcohol
but I think people can be trained from
one to the other and so we label these
things mental illness when a person just
persistently routinely habitually
engages in the bad behavior
now hard-nosed on that I guess I suppose
um but yeah then there are other kinds
of genuine mental illness like
um uh schizophrenia absolutely okay
there's a genetic component there where
people's uh uh there's absolutely a
complete Nutter inability of the
conscious mind to control what's going
on in the unconscious absolutely okay we
have unconscious minds
but but modulo that kind of stuff modulo
brain problems because that would come
down to a hardware issue
the overwhelming majority of
[Music]
um
things that people
I don't know complain about and others
are in themselves are a matter of ideas
and people underestimate I think it
dehumanizes people to underestimate
their capacity to change their
circumstance or at least with the help
of a wise and
um knowledgeable guide which might
include the psychiatrist might include
the counselor might include the
psychologist to provide them the ideas
to get over it to get over the bad ideas
they have to provide them a new way of
moving forward now
that said does that therefore mean that
things like antidepressants and things
like I don't know benzodiazepine the the
the a whole bunch of different drugs
won't be useful or never of any facility
to a person with the so-called mental
illness which I'm saying isn't real no
not at all sometimes we don't know the
psychiatrist doesn't know
how to help the person with the bad idea
sometimes the person with a bad idea
doesn't know how to get over the
depression
some people lose you know
parents and grandparents and fall into a
terrible depression and can't get over
it
others go through the same thing but get
over it
once they get over it they can function
better in society and can still have a
joyful life in a way the other person
can't
this was not a physical thing that
happened to them the loss of someone
they cared about
but it's had
this devastating effect they don't know
how to get over can
firstly counseling is going to help them
for some people will the drug help
absolutely because they don't know how
to generate the idea in time and so as
we've also said you know it might not be
the case that something like an
antidepressant actually makes you
happier it might just lower your
standards for What happiness is and so
this is also a way in which we think of
the Mind as being a kind of software
which if you can tweak the software
without ever worrying about the hardware
that's always preferable if you can do
that
it's always the beginning of infinity
there are always open questions
I just think that it's important because
of the culture that we always exist in a
culture the culture right now is
saturated in the idea that people need
to be medicated people need to
immediately jump to the the pill to
solve the the mental illness problem
everyone's got mental illness we've all
got anxiety and depression by any metric
this is the what was what were being fed
this is what we're getting in the United
States you know you're constantly fed
the these advertisements about you know
how you should want to feel better and
take this pill and so on and so forth
without being told you know um
maybe you don't need that maybe maybe
you can
um reflect upon ways in which to improve
yourself without trying to affect the
chemistry of the brain okay that's often
a lung tangent all that we were asked
about was hardware and software in the
brain the context mental illness Kyle
Baker has asked me what are your
thoughts on the world economic forum
yes well
genuinely a danger to civilization
genuinely
um Klaus Schwab he just I mean
it it is unfortunate where we have these
supranational organizations that have
the pretense of doing something useful
in the world
but on analysis they're about global
social control and he absolutely is and
the world economic Forum seems to be
absolutely fixated upon
what people are doing about climate
change how they're using their money
um controlling the
not merely things like pandemics but
people's individual reactions to
pandemics being able to monitor people
it appears to me that very many of the
prescriptions coming out of there are
nothing but the Chinese model of how to
organize Society one of the greatest
errors
that were made I think during covert was
to First Look to the Chinese at what
they were doing and emulate that it's
the first time it's ever been done and
it was done with remarkable speed
and I think that's frightening I think
it's great that the vaccine was produced
with remarkable speed
I'm concerned that you know
um
that the other measures that were taken
we're also done with remarkable Speed
without any good reflection on things
I'm concerned about things being made
compulsory the world economic forum is
not a democratic institution it's it's
it's it's a good a whole bunch of
dystopian ideas
and the more
time I spend doing stuff like this the
more it
it I don't know to some extent one feels
as if the tidal wave of
pessimism and authoritarianism and um
anti-humanism
just continues to Crest ever higher and
governments of the world nation states
of the world continue to in response
your response to these philosophies
Grant Evermore uh Authority and power
and decision-making
to non-democratically elected
institutions and it it's absolutely
remarkable to me as well the public
intellectuals of the world
uh similarly and full support of this
you hear people speak about how well
Global government ultimately is the way
we need to go we need to go that way
because we can't have the United States
and China and Russia you know engaged in
possible conflict
why not why not why is that a less
preferable State of Affairs than Global
government
if you have a global government There Is
No Escape
in this sense for the time being there's
no plan there's no Planet B so
I you know in the far distant future
there is absolutely there's already
Planet B's that we've discovered out
there but there's nowhere to go right
now
we can we can get much faster to a
global government than we can get to
Interstellar space travel is my concern
so that if we have this hugely powerful
World economic Forum United Nations
whatever
can legislate from the top down
there's nowhere for a person to go
the United States is such a wonderful
experiment because at least in theory
if you don't like the legislation that's
being passed in a particular State you
can go somewhere else
if there are severe restrictions on
rights in one place compulsory
vaccinations you're not allowed to own
your own gun etc etc etc going on in one
state
then hop in your car move your family to
another state where you can do these
things and this is the great United
States experiment which doesn't happen
very where else in the anywhere else in
the world really you know to a much
lesser extent we have it in Australia
much lesser extent federal government
has uh more power but also Australia is
a different case altogether with our
tiny population you know is is by
comparison to the United States
it means that there's generally not as
much polarization the cohesion is a
little greater
and so you know
it you move via grayscale from
caring about your household and family
to your local community to your state to
your nation
and Australia is more like
state
the whole nation of Australia is more
like a state
it's more like California it's more like
Texas or it's more like Montana than it
is the United States right it's more
like that just because the population
and so
you know if things get terrible in
Australia we can go to New Zealand at
the moment you wouldn't want to go to
New Zealand because things are terrible
but if things get terrible in Australia
you know in theory you can sort of
get out and go to the United States in
the United States
seems to have this constitution where
you still do have state rights to a
large extent so you know the people who
don't mind walking down the street you
know behind people who are you know
smoking marijuana like a chimney that's
fine okay there you go you've got
California if you don't like that for
whatever reason you don't like that then
you can go to a state where that's not
permitted
if you like a place where people are
walking around open carrying guns you
can go to Texas and if you don't like
that then you can go to New York okay
you've got that choice wonderful choice
in the United States the problem seems
to be the federal government because
then you know everyone everyone has to
somehow agree on Federal Government
Federal Government
Etc
but Australia is not quite like this
um so my idea my con my thoughts on the
world economic Forum the same as my
thoughts on the United Nations is the
more that you concentrate power at the
top the less Choice people tend to have
and that worries me I and just in
general their world view is that
people are a problem and of course
they're they're very World economic
Forum in particular is very much about
uh let's distribute you know a little
bit more money to these people and take
away from these people there's a control
of
world economies which just it does not
need to exist under free market
capitalism it's it's bottom up and you
don't need anyone with a hand on the uh
on the scales controlling stuff you need
someone you you need the police force
there to ensure that
there's not robbery going on there's not
coercion Force being used but beyond
that the government doesn't need to be
involved certainly not a global
organization that's the
concerned about trade World economic
Forum okay yeah so that's
that's that um
now I'm just clicking on Twitter to see
what else we've got here
um a few other questions
here or
uh someone has said
uh hervey time does not flow the past
the present and the future coexist does
this mean that the Multiverse
that in the multiversal that can
possibly happen as per the laws of
physics has already happened in infinite
time scale
um
so
obviously if you step outside of time if
you could have a God's eye view of the
Multiverse which you can't then you look
down and you see the Multiverse and you
see the past the present and the future
are all equally real okay yeah so that's
true but that's not our circumstance to
some extent it's kind of an
uninteresting fact about our
circumstance as well because we are in
a universe and subjectively everything's
open to us but I also tend to think I
also tend to think that knowledge
creation is an actual Act of Creation
that we do not understand yet and we're
yet to Grapple with and so to what
extent is the future open I think
entirely within the bounds of the laws
of physics so although everything that
can possibly happen happens in the
Multiverse
and we can't get outside of the
Multiverse to look anyway
then it genuinely is the case that
people have to work hard to create the
knowledge because it's not going to
happen inevitably
we have to create the history
although
it's possible that you know the cure to
all cancers will come and in some branch
of the Multiverse that happened
that branch of the Multiverse where that
happened could also be infinitely thin
very very thin the thinnest possible
branch that you can imagine it happened
because it's possible to happen and it's
not a genuine history because it's a
sequence of accidents that's happened
it appears from the the the the person
who occupies that Universe where all
cancers have been cured
that branch of the universe where it's
possible and you can just say okay it's
possible that in some part of the
Multiverse all the cancers on planet
Earth have been cured from the
perspective of that person looking
backwards although it appears as though
a whole bunch of causes and explanations
were created in fact they never were
it's just coincidence after coincidence
that has led to that
that in other words a Harry Potter type
universe
the real Universe creating conjecturing
explanations
would proliferate across the Multiverse
and create a very large structure that
is resilient this thing called knowledge
and so in that way
um
although everything that can happen does
happen here we have a situation where
that thing that can happen does happen a
lot and is replicated across the
Multiverse and that's things called
knowledge
okay so there's a distinction to be made
between just any old random thing that
happens consistent with the laws of
physics and the thing that happens a lot
in the Multiverse
precisely because we've generated the
knowledge of how to do so
this is to do with again you have to go
to my Multiverse series on this thing
called Harry Potter universes which was
a a thing coined to early read by early
readers of the fabric of reality when we
considered
these ideas about
extremely low
uh probability extremely low measure
events where certain things happen only
exceedingly rarely
okay but yeah time does not flow and
this also goes to the thing I started
this whole live stream with is that as a
matter of conscious experience
you experience a particular State then
you experience another particular State
and then you experience another
particular state so you're not
experiencing change you're just
experiencing States
but to get from one state to the other
you don't experience the thing that got
you from that to that it's just it's a
discreet movement
move I say movement yeah so time's not
flowing correct
um the illusion of time is Flowing is
all that we have
foreign
[Music]
YouTube as the chat's been going on I've
been ignoring the chat so now I'll come
to the actual chat
Lionel I don't cut Lionel okay
he said hi Brett I would love if you
read or discuss philosophy of physics
books later on your podcast also what do
you think about modeling theory of David
I don't understand that question I'm
afraid I'm sorry
um
foreign
[Laughter]
sorry Lionel I don't I don't I I can't
pass what you're saying you might want
to rephrase
the modeling theory of David has tenses
I don't know it
um
Moritz what is the goal of AGI a person
or he's also asked what do you think
about doing a Twitter space with a bunch
of CR people more questions Okay so
what is the goal of AGR the whole
purpose of AGI by the way and a person
is they don't we don't have goals that's
the difference between
the difference between a A specialized
intelligence okay the the prosaic
artificial intelligence narrow eye and
general intelligence the special
intelligence can be given a goal and it
will only ever pursue that goal that's
it it can't think outside the box
a person is never really given a goal
you can think you've got a goal but
you're going to get distracted and so
you will not relentlessly pursue that
cause disciplined as you are you're
always going to think creatively
um
what's the point of pursuing AGI I guess
out of curiosity
um if you're asking that question you
know what is our goal in in in
generating AGI
curiosity would be the main one we want
more people in the world more people
create more solutions
Lift Us from worse problems to better
problems people are the way in which we
improve the world uh more people is
always better
almost always better
okay we're in a situation now where more
people are better there might have been
a time in our history static societies
where that wasn't the case because more
people are more mouths to feed we're not
in that situation anymore it is the case
they're more mouths to feed but we've
got enough resources and we'll always
have more resources so yeah
um
what do I think about doing a Twitter
space with a bunch of CR people yeah I'm
I'm open to it I am spontaneous is the
issue uh uh like with this now okay I
just decided to do this now uh I'm
increasingly of the opinion
people like
David himself in the vale rap account
others that scheduling time is always an
issue like to work rather spontaneously
and the more people you have
exponentially the the more difficulties
to coordinate things if someone starts a
Twitter space
on whatever and it seems interesting
I'll join in you know Elon had one the
other day I was going just at a time
which was convenient for me so I
listened in so I would do the same for
any other as well yeah
um
he's also asked why is having two
classes of pay as bad well as I said
it's not that
for Twitter that having two classes of
people you know one of whom pays on one
of whom doesn't pay as bad that's fine I
love that model you know have paid
subscribers and then the free Supply
that's fine the problem is telling
everyone I don't want everyone to know
that I'm paying why it's my preference I
don't whatever it's exactly like I
compared it to you know there are Jesus
talked about this I'm not not a hugely
religious person but you know this is an
old lesson Jesus chastised the person
outside of the temple who was making a
big show of hey look everyone I'm
donating to the temple you know to the
poor people look how wonderful I am
uh you know donating lots of money
getting a lot of Kudos from the people
around him and then the old lady who had
almost nothing to spare quietly going up
and putting a little bit of money into
the the plate you know and he said of
his followers you know who is doing more
who has given more there well the little
old lady who had almost nothing to give
but gave what she could of course you
know as a proportion but also because
she was modest and humble in doing so is
there
uh any great virtue and being modest and
not being an arrogant I'm old school and
I kind of think yeah
yeah we know people
you know
who am I to talk I'm here on a live
stream but showing off is is a thing
that is easily spotted out there in the
world easily spotted and I things like
that
badges
special hats
Stars whatever
um yeah I think you should if you want
to show off show off
if you want a badge have a badge great I
don't mind do whatever you like I'm just
saying me for me I'm paying money
should not be allowed to choose what I
spend my money on well unfortunately I
can't right now I want the additional
time for video I don't want the badge
but there isn't that option there isn't
that option to have the Blue Tick
Blue Tick
I can see a reason for having the Blue
Tick if absolutely every account had a
tick of some sort absolutely every
account had a tick that would be fine so
then you'd know okay
yellow tick means bot okay it's a
programmed Twitter account that is just
automated there's that one that
knowledge theory that tweets out some of
my tweets and David's in the vowels
great put a yellow tick next to that so
people know there's no person behind
that I think that's great and then every
person every actual person gets a Blue
Tick that's fine but we don't need one
just to say oh you paid
silly
um
why should the paying person not have
more credibility or power well because
it's the Morrison Network that that I
think is more obvious
no one has more credibility or power
this is human
Society Elon has stated he wants Twitter
he views Twitter as the Public Square if
it is the Public Square everyone's equal
it doesn't matter if you're the king the
chief Court Justice
um the street sweeper or the scientist
everyone can talk everyone can say and
everyone everyone is a human being and
by that metric you know all equal
infinite ignorance no one has special
access to anything and so there by that
that is why no one has more credibility
or power you don't you simply do not
by virtue of a tick or anything but
credential nothing do you have more
credibility or power you can always be
wrong yeah you can say your credentialed
I'm a high Court Justice I've got a PhD
in this okay great okay we would hope
that you would have some knowledge there
but you're no less prone to error
okay
is that
um
Maxine Leroy has asked our supergiant
elliptical galaxy is the place where
intelligent space traveling life is most
probable
the metallicity of their stars is high
and the formation of ancient which gave
more chance for life to appear
possibly there is this notion of
Galactic Evolution as well that spiral
galaxies eventually unravel themselves
into giant ellipticals so the giant
ellipticals can sometimes have lower
metallicity
they generally are huge okay that's why
they call Giant ellipticals you put a
giant elliptical next to a uh you know
your typical spiral galaxy like the
Andromeda or the Milky Way and there is
a vast difference in size these things
there's not many of them that are close
by so it's difficult to see
some of these giant ellipticals which
might be in the distant part of the
universe which means you can't tell
what's there we just don't know what
planets would be like in other parts of
the universe inside other galaxies would
expect them of course to be the same you
know it's the cosmological principle
whatever is true of our region of space
including our galaxies
should be true of
distant galaxies as well modulo the fact
that you know the further away you look
the further back in time you look and
the conditions the actual proportion of
things like Metals in the distant part
of the universe is different as well so
where are the intelligent aliens well
you've also got the other problem of
even if the conditions are
are okay in a very distant region of the
universe you know favorable for life
you know you you point your telescope
and your spectroscope to a a a Galaxy
that is five billion light years away
let's call it
let's call it 10 billion like is why
and you see that it's got all the
requisite elements there are you going
to find intelligent life well the
problem then you have is that here on
Earth
it took about five billion years four
and a half billion years
for intelligent life human beings to
evolve is that approximately how long it
takes
so if it's approximately how long it
takes all else being equal and you find
a planet that formed only three billion
years after
the Big Bang then you might not okay
because it hasn't had enough time to
evolve yeah we don't know enough about
and we can't constrain these things you
know if the dinosaurs had not been wiped
out by the chance collision with an
asteroid planet Earth would they still
be wandering around would they be
intelligent I doubt it would people be
here I doubt it because all the mammals
would have been eaten that could have
evolved into us by the dinosaurs so
they're just open question after open
question after open question so
saying that certain places are more
probable than others I think is is
meaningless we don't have enough
data it's fun to talk about though but
it's a huge conversation
um
okay so black locust has asked Roger
Penrose is brilliant presumably as
familiar with Turing girdle computation
Etc as Deutsch yet why contrary to
Deutsche did they say whatever's going
in our minds is not a computation
because he's wrong
yeah it's him and hammerhoff I think is
the fellow's name that have this theory
about the microtubules
and the microtubules are what give us
the capacity to have Consciousness you
know in our brains something like that
the Consciousness comes down to a
Quantum phenomena of some kind I also
find this dubious Penrose
you know he he doesn't endorse the
Multiverse he's brilliant but you know
brilliant people can be wrong
[Music]
so yeah uh he like there are many he
doesn't understand computational
universality it's a simple idea but
people can misunderstand simple ideas
uh Martin Reese's precisely has the same
perspective
that
um
understanding he's explicitly said this
and one of the debates he had with David
Deutsch that understanding is not a type
of computation
but why but why
given that
what's going on in the brain
is a matter of Mata doing stuff the
brain is material it's matter doing
things
whatever matter does is
a computation of a Kind it can be
simulated by a computer
so therefore whatever a brain is doing
at this level of fidelity if you wanted
to if in theory in the future you could
scan all of a person's brain and the
goings on there
and simulate that in a silicon computer
in a laptop of the future
then that laptop would be doing the
stuff would be simulating all the goings
on the brain it would be thinking it
would be doing the stuff that the brain
is doing so the brain is thinking here
it would be thinking there and if you
don't think that if you don't think that
then you're introducing another thing
that is outside of the laws of physics
you're just appealing to the
supernatural that's all nothing but so
you can say that you're a mathematical
physicist and say that you're an
astronomer Royal and say that you place
science on a pedestal
but if you deny
that the laws of physics are Universal
and govern all matter and that quantum
theory governs all matter that it's our
best understanding our best explanation
of the world
and that all physically possible
processes are computable and you admit
all of that and then say but except for
the brain and what the brain is doing in
thought
you're just Supernatural That's all uh
people make this mistake they've always
made this mistake you know there's
always some sacred cow
that that even the best Among Us
are unwilling to slay I suppose
uh and some of us just want to be uh
reason absolutists
for want of another word but just pursue
reason to its absolutely doesn't mean we
could be wrong no we're fallibles as
well it could be the case it could be
the case that that this idea that the
laws of physics as they're known now are
completely off all right let's admit
that tick now let's make some progress
okay we can't use that we can't use
penrose's idea or Martin Reese's idea
that the laws of physics as they are
don't apply to brains because that
doesn't allow us to make progress what
we can do is to start with the best
theories we have pursue them to their
uttermost ends whatever they happen to
be and see what Solutions we can find
until such time as we encounter a
problem so far there has been no problem
with this if you want to develop AGI you
better want to have
a notion that
it's a physical system of a kind
or has it can be instantiated in a
physical system which can replicate
what's going on inside of human brain so
yeah uh it's merely when people say but
and I'm not having a go at you black
locust and you know but but people do
bring up Roger Penrose rather often with
this and others it's an appeal to
Authority I mean you may as well say the
local priest thinks the same thing okay
what is the underlying explanation they
have they don't have one
we're not saying we can explain
precisely how it is
that mind and thought and ideas and
knowledge arise as explanatory knowledge
arises in the mind on the brain as a
matter of fact just that it does and so
therefore
this matter this complex matter we call
a brain can give rise to these things
called thoughts and consciousness
so Mata can do this stuff
all matter behaves in such a way
interacts in a way that can be captured
by a computer can be stimulated by a
computer
so and if you deny that you're just
denying physics it's just it appeal to
the supernatural as we say
uh
uh Maxine says I think Penrose believes
the diagonal argument could not have
been found by finite turing machine
therefore human
yes but David Deutsch makes this point
as well
okay if you if you write down on a piece
of paper your name say and followed by
yourself I wrote down Brett Hall cannot
consistently judge this sentence to be
consistent or cannot cannot consistently
judge this sentence to be true
um or false rather false cannot judge
these incentives to be false then yeah
it's the Liar's Paradox I can't I can't
judge that sentence to be false because
if I try to then it'll be true and if I
deny it it'll be false so yes you can
wrap yourself up in these games logic
and that's what Penrose does but anyone
else can see that Brett Hall cannot
judge this sentence to be false as true
you can see it I just can't I can't do
it because it refers to me it's one of
these indexical type things
self-referential things okay good
um
uh John ortitz has asked I'm trying to
learn maths and logic what are some ways
of learning this material uh pursue
what's fun is all I would say
uh uh you know when I was learning the
stuff that was learning stuff at
University I I just had a natural
aversion to certain kinds of something
they fed me so much calculus there was a
point at which I remember our calculus
is fun you know especially when I was
trying to teach myself
um non-linear differential equations I
was talking about this in a previous top
cast as well you know that that
um this was the underlying theory of
Chaos Theory the mathematics of Chaos
Theory relied upon these non-linear
differential equations so I really
wanted to learn about these things and
how you could generate fractals and so I
did
and I learned about partial differential
equations so that was all fun
um
but then the more calculus they kept
throwing at me the the more I began to
resist it and sort of thought this is
getting boring you know
um the geometry often found boring as
well so you've got to find the thing
that you're financially I always found
logic absolutely fascinating
um and the reason is because I almost it
was like I knew there was the thing I
wanted to understand I wanted to
understand girls in completeness theorem
it's the first time to understand baby
logic and proposition logic and then the
underlying logic of
um uh uh arithmetic simple arithmetic
and so you had to you had to learn this
in order to understand girdles and
complaints too and that was fun because
I knew I was learning stuff and making
progress along the way
so where do you start look for all the
terrible stuff I say about high school
high school textbooks if you don't know
anything else a great source I mean
because they've they've tested
um themselves against reality for all
that you say that's bad about school and
especially mathematics classes and I
would agree
um if you're if you want to teach
yourself what this thing called calculus
is and you've got no other understanding
of it get a high school textbook I mean
end or watch YouTubes and so on and so
forth and the reason I say High School
textbooks is because
they've had to go through the trials and
tribulations of actually working
teachers for all their flaws want a
simple to understand textbook that works
that actually teaches kids
there are all sorts of online stuff that
you can do as well
um in this day and age online schools
and things YouTube is obviously a great
resource but to practice you you kind of
want
little maths puzzles to to work through
yeah
um
yeah so black locust is asked I'm
interested in Deutsch's critique of
Jared Diamond's materialist theory on
the development of human species what
does David Deutsch think is likely does
any historians work dovetail with
deutsches
so this is uh
in I forget Which chapter chapter on
optimism perhaps
um in the beginning of infinity talks
about Jared Diamonds
um account of History yeah and um it's
all couched in terms of resources and
you know one of the reasons that Western
Civilization is the way that it is
because
we were lucky to get to the resources
first
it's not concentrating on the ideas it's
not covered David focuses on the culture
of criticism uniquely uniquely so far as
I can tell
this notion that
the enlightenment can be explained by
people rejecting Authority and then
just become coming to have this
panopticon vision of criticism applying
to everything all the time
and this is the way that Improvement
happens and even if you don't
consciously know that this is the
process implicitly this is what is
happening in society anyway and you grow
up in this culture where it's fine for
you to criticize stuff okay there are
Pockets you know where this isn't
working as well as it could parenting is
one school and education is absolutely
another okay children are still not
brought up in a culture which is a
culture of criticism as well as what the
adults are and everything can be
improved the culture of criticism can
always be improved can always be made
better but this is the thing that
distinguishes us and our rapid progress
from all those other failed societies
uh yes and so Jared Diamond misses that
um does any historians work well I don't
know enough about other historians work
I know there are some people on Twitter
that are very good at this and they are
they are in history I can't remember
their names by now right now
um
you'd need historians that are familiar
with philosophy as well to give a better
account of
societies that have succeeded and the
conditions that explain why and those
that have failed
um yeah it's uh David Deutsch is
providing the
philosophical background
to why civilization
that we occupy
has managed to solve the problems that
the patient has why it stands apart from
everything else nothing to do with
colonialism and Conquest nothing to do
with
let's say even things like greater
wealth the greater wealth and health and
success of the civilization is a symptom
of something far Deep by the
philosophical underpinnings the
epistemological underpinnings namely
that we have this relationship to
knowledge we out of that race the
knowledge because of our relationship to
physics the relationship the knowledge
in particular is
everyone can have it everyone can have
knowledge it's not just the domain of
the king and the priest and the holy
book everyone can come to understand the
world and in fact that's necessary we We
Now understand that you know this is
important that everyone learns to read
and write and come to and I'm single we
celebrate you know the children becoming
better unfortunately we don't do a very
good job
um you know they they learn in spite of
our terrible tradition of learning but
at least at least we recognize that it's
wonderful that
people learn and create and so on and so
forth and the central part of that is to
criticize to not have great deference
to the leaders
and the experts
and the priests
not to say don't have respect and don't
uh understand that some people know more
than you and all that sort of stuff
all that's fine
but even if the person does know more
than you that is not a that is not an
argument for them being able to compel
you to do what to do you could always
the person that knows the most can
always be an error and the person that
knows less
should always be able to make the
mistake
to some extent you know you don't want
them to lose their life
but you want them to also learn
by their own lights
okay rather than just being told or
compelled and so on
apologies
um
thank you Levi Levi said good work on
the recent video on climate
um
next question uh what can governments or
an organization do to accelerate the
growth of knowledge
all the things that I said in that that
exact video about degrowth uh
the growth of knowledge is intimately
tied to the growth of wealth the growth
of wealth is intimately tied to growth
broadly in things like population energy
production
um uh technology all those other
agriculture etc etc etc the growth and
flourishing of the human species
is intimately tied to knowledge creation
change any one of those and you'll
reduce the others
they are necessarily dependent upon one
another reduce the amount of wealth you
will slow down the growth of knowledge
reduce the population and you will
reduce the growth of knowledge more
people means more ideas
um restrict the amount of energy so that
Things become more expensive reduce the
amount of wealth reduce the amount of
the rate at which knowledge is produced
things get better and look being an
optimist I accept the fact that things
get better all the time
there are there are moods in which I can
be a pessimistic type of optimist
in the mold of David Deutsch by saying
things like it's always possible to have
the progress even faster than what it is
and that it upsets me when there are
obvious things going on seemingly
obvious that are slowing down the rate
of progress not progress altogether it's
not like we're going backwards I'm not
with the people who say certain things
are causing regression I don't think
that's true that's over hyping things
that's hyperbolic
but any simple change like
reduce the income tax rate
which causes people to want to go out
and earn more money
it gives them motivation
to do more stuff
that's a simple change that could
increase the rate of knowledge creation
so what can governments governments can
can just it's the standard take that
people on that side of politics have
reduce taxes and reduce regulation
that's it that's really enough no
nothing magical about that
um because taxation is nothing but
taking from people who produce
to give to people who don't namely or to
put in the hands of people who don't
namely politicians so politicians then
decide what's going to happen with that
money rather than the business owner who
was using the money to make more money
you have to create wealth wealth is not
a fixed pie it's not a fixed amount of
resources and a fixed amount of money no
you create it when you take those
resources out of the ground you
rearrange them in different ways to make
widgets and things which make everyone
wealthier
the cost of the material I'm speaking to
people right now on a MacBook
and the MacBook has rare earth metals
and it's made of aluminum and plastic
and stuff
those materials on their own taken out
of the ground what I don't I don't know
maybe there's a tiny little bit of gold
in there and and Palladium and tantalum
and rare earth metals and so on you add
it all up I don't know maybe it comes to
50 American dollars okay that's like the
lithium lithium in the battery maybe
that comes to 100.
it certainly doesn't come to the sum
thousands that the computer is worse
right
so why how has it gone from this raw
materials that worth some hundreds of
dollars
when rearranged become a device worth
thousands
the wealth has been created that
additional cost has been created where
by people's knowledge by the inventor
and the Creator's knowledge and the work
of people not merely putting the thing
together but primarily having the idea
in the first place
the descendants of the Steve Jobs of the
world who came up with the first Apple
computers are the ones who've created
that knowledge and continue to create
that knowledge which is creating the
wealth once it is put into
the resources to create that thing we
call a piece of technology
or a laptop computer
so I guess so how can how can
governments create more wealth
reduce the regulations on companies that
are actually doing precisely that sort
of thing that are using resources and
transforming them into technology
because the wealth is held within it's
almost like it's held within the bonds
that hold together that bit of
Technology the truth is it's held within
the abstract relationships between
the atoms and molecules of the resources
that now come to make up the computer or
the smartphone or the car or the
airplane or whatever it happens to be
whatever the bit of technology is
it's the plan written down on a piece of
paper or stored in memory somewhere that
is really worth something where did that
worth come from from people's heads
but they can't do that they can't do
that as well if they don't have enough
money to do the research and have time
to do the thinking and all that sort of
stuff which only comes with increased
wealth so governments have to figure out
ways to increase wealth and way to not
increase wealth is to tax people the way
to not increase wealth is to have
regulations on what kind of products can
be produced or under what conditions
they can be produced and that kind of
thing as you're on Brook points out
companies of the world do not want to
kill their customers you don't need to
have
um government regulations on things like
elevators and I know some people balk at
this idea but it's not like it's not a
good plan for elevator manufacturers to
kill their customers as soon as you get
known as being the person who makes the
elevator that falls 15 floors okay
you're not going to be contracted to to
work in the next high-rise no we want
the and in fact of course we know now
that the overall majority of companies
whatever industry they're engaged in
regulate themselves far more than what
the government regulates but the
government likes to regulate which means
they have to employ Regulators they have
to write laws about all this stuff that
all costs money and so
yeah
the government should be there to
protect rights and to the extent that
it's not there merely to protect
the rights of
consumers and Traders and citizens
and it's getting into other areas
is is slowing growth
um knowledge growth growth in the energy
area
growth everywhere it's an if you want an
existential threat I'd say that's one
for you because we're not not often
making progress fast enough
um
a deal zishan could you explain what
scientism is and why it is wrong
that scientism is the application of
science to things that are not
scientific
so if I want to know uh you know once I
finish this live stream you know it's
coming up to Christmas I have to buy
Christmas gifts for people I have a few
people in mind that I've got to get
Christmas gifts for if I was to say well
I've got to do a scientific study to
figure out what is the best Christmas
gift has kept my you know
nieces and nephews that's what that's
fine I need to need to run a scientific
study of some sort get an average of
people that age something like that do
an experiment this is scientism this is
the wrong question
what I should do in the future is a
matter of preferences for a particular
individual preferences for me this is
the domain of morality
not science science is about what is the
case
and if you're very lucky with certain
physical systems you can make a
prediction about what will be the case
under certain conditions but it can
never tell you what should be the case
and yes of course you have people who
say well if you can measure the
well-being of people then you know you
can you can you can maximize well-being
in the future
the problem here is
what counts as being good for well-being
right now
you know how do I know that getting a
Mac rather than a PC produces more
well-being and if I scan the brains of
people who already have PCS and Macs
does that tell you what I should get
what is the more moral purchase to make
morality is about the domain of shoulds
science is about the domain of Isis
scientism is attempting to
bridge the gap often for authoritarian
reasons when I say that I mean
it's the expert scientists trying to do
something other than science trying to
say hey I'm an expert scientist I have a
PhD in science
and so therefore politician you need to
listen to me do you want to refuse to
listen to expert opinion of course they
don't this is science
this is the problem with scientism it's
a form of authoritarianism often
masquerading as scientific rationality
it is quite possible that certain
scientists have uh what do you call it
small man syndrome you know it's like
that would not be I'm not being listened
to enough
I've told you damn it climate change is
coming and it's going to kill us all
um you know so they start writing
articles and saying what should be done
it is more than reasonable and valid for
climate change scientists to tell us
what the state of the climate is
to tell us what their models are and
tell us what their models are going to
predict
I can suggest
um what the solution should be as well
and it's incumbent upon the rest of us
to say well
models always have elasticity models are
only as good as the laws that you're
using to govern the system the laws you
think exist that govern your system the
conditions you think you've been able to
measure
to produce the prediction always
exceedingly difficult and for reasons we
won't go into right now perhaps
impossible
um
so it's incumbent upon the rest of us to
say yeah look we respect
what you're saying is an expert as a
scientist we respect the idea that
you've got this scientific model but we
also know that the models are very much
open to error
and you only need to have small errors
some of these things are very
susceptible to small changes
for the prediction to be way off
that's one thing
and the other thing is
your job is to tell us what is the case
and to tell us what you predict is going
to be the case
it shouldn't be also to command us to
about what we should do especially when
it comes to economic policy and energy
policy and any other kind of policy
that's the job of the politician
politicians are very weak at the moment
quite around the world by week I mean
because they defer they Outsource their
the decision-making to the expert this
has happened especially during covert
but everywhere else and they shouldn't
they shouldn't because one consideration
is science one consideration another is
the economics another for one of another
word is the well-being of people
cohesion of society
any number of other factors that are
absolutely as important as what the
science is and by the way problems are
soluble and optimism is a thing and
politicians uh singularly unaware of
this philosophy of optimism
and how problems are soluble and we do
not need to try and prevent problems but
all of them are animated right now
especially when it comes to
all of them are are participating in a
scientism experiment right now with
respect to climate change because the
climate change scientists and others in
the intellectual Community who are
typically scientists as well or have
some scientific understanding are
precisely the ones prescribing certain
economic theories because the culture in
amongst those intellectual communities
of scientists is a socialist leaning
it's a leaning towards more government
more Taxation and why because often
they're engaged in universities and
other sectors where they earn their
money from taxation from government
they're employed by the government so of
course they're going to support
government action and support big
businesses paying more taxes because
it's good for them
that's where they get their funding from
of course
all of the climate scientists at at
Cambridge University are going to be
unified on the notion that we need more
government taxation of high polluters uh
and and and regulations why because they
will be the beneficiaries
more money for the universities
or money for me is a lecturer of climate
science
yeah so we have to be you know I am very
skeptical about certain areas like that
unfortunately
but to some extent I say they've done it
to themselves
they've done it for themselves by
overegging it year after year after year
after year
and it becomes tiresome and it also
becomes tiresome as a just a regular
layperson citizen as I am listening to
uh
politicians talking about the one
problem the one issue fixated on them
because it's it's also frightening not
frightening for what climate change
might do or anything like that front end
because they're not looking at other
stuff they're not paying attention to
other things there's social cohesion uh
nuclear weapons terrorism and just
funding fundamental science might be a
start as well
uh yeah look what can you do
um
is that scientism
uh Abraham has asked can you explain the
vs popper argument probably not in
the time I'm going to allow myself left
which is let's say another 15 minutes
um the fabric of reality the final
chapter of the fabric of reality has a
wonderful explanation of
uh Thomas Kuhn look
Thomas Kuhn to some extent he was a
realist he you know
but it's what his movement led to that
is really the problem
he thought that
scientists were of one of two sorts
either you're a scientist who was the
old fogy who would refuse to move on
their most cherished theory that they
discovered decades ago or you were the
young upstart who had a new idea who
couldn't get their ideas
published in the mainstream you know
journals and so on and so forth
because the old fogies were in charge
and you had to wait for the old Focus to
die off before the young upstarts were
able to get a foothold
this was Kern's idea roughly speaking
you know you had these the old Paradigm
and the new paradigm and if you're in
one Paradigm you didn't understand the
other part but it's all wrong it's all
wrong scientists do in fact change their
mind okay
um people can be persuaded there is a
lot of mixing between the different
paradigms you know Einstein was trained
in classical physics but he invented or
helped invent quantum theory and general
relativity General will still be on his
own quantum theory with a bunch of other
people uh all the original Quantum
theorists okay all of quantum theory was
invented by people who are trained in
classical physics and who understood
classical physics
you know Newton was building upon you
know who'd gone before who would have
disagreed with him so
there's that uh so so Kuhn had this idea
tried to paint a picture of the project
of science as being similar to the way
in which fashion works that you know you
like this particular Theory yeah you
like wearing this style of clothes and
the younger people like something
different a new idea a different fashion
uh and so it wasn't like you're
objectively turning over getting closer
to an explanation of reality a better
explanation over time you were just
moving from one Theory to another from
one Paradigm to another
and Papa said no this is not what's
going on you're actually making
objective progress you're actually
improving and finding something out
about the objective real world it's not
merely fashion
Papa can accept that there are
sociological forces at play absolutely
no one denies that no one denies that
scientists don't live in a community or
it's just talking about that and that
people can become wedded to their
theories and identify themselves with
their theories and so on and become
defensive and all that sort of stuff
but the thing is this does not explain
science science is explained by Papa the
fact that we do make progress the fact
that these these these changes over time
incremental and large really do point in
the direction of progress with you know
backward steps now and again
what happens in science is not accounted
for by
it's it's a minor side issue the fact
that sometimes the old fogies stand in
the way of the young upstarts sometimes
that happens but that is not an
explanation of what's really going on or
why it is you know quantum theory takes
a while to be understood
it just Quantum Theory comes to be
understood pretty rapidly actually it's
taken decades okay the Newton's theory
was around for centuries
so
yeah I would say um uh worth
understanding Koon simply because he his
ideas lead to a long Trio said long
decades-long tradition and basically
that's the most cited work in the
humanities remains Kerns the structure
of Scientific Revolution
and you know he led to a whole bunch of
movements which became increasingly
relativist increasingly the idea that
it's all merely a matter of opinion that
there is no objective uh knowledge being
created here it's just your preference
you want to be a classical physicist and
endorse the idea that you know things
can be divided up continuously oh that's
your opinion in a matter of taste okay
or you can think that things are
discrete and it's quantum theory
um there's no objective truth in the
matter uh that that's where it ends up
it ends up in
um places like that in places like well
the entire project of science is
corrupted by the white male patriarchy
and we need to do away with the whole
thing because it's inherently racist and
Colonial
that's where that's where you ultimately
get you can draw a straight line from
that to now Kuhn is not responsible
if Paul Kern you know Thomas Kearney for
all of his flaws he didn't mean for that
to happen he couldn't have predicted it
um
but that's the the the the seeds of
relativism are there unfortunately for
uh yeah
so that's that
um okay
uh zombie and James have said if someone
has a different ethical system than us
how can we argue that one is better than
the other we begin that's a good
question we begin with principles that
we know
best explanations for example coercion
isn't evil we should try and remove
coercion everywhere that we can why what
comes back to knowledge knowledge is
created in a free creative environment
and as soon as you're being worse people
you impact upon their reason you prevent
them from being able to think in certain
ways and do certain things to create
knowledge to solve problems we want to
solve problems okay this is an objective
good about the world and if you want to
deny that solving problems is an
objective good about the world you're
you're now a relativist okay and so
I will take you on your word your eldest
then you can't be persuaded and so well
there's no point I was talking
but if you're
not willing to go that way if you're
willing to say yeah there are objective
facts about reality namely that there
are scientific truths there are ways in
which we can improve science okay we can
actually come to a better understanding
of the world we can generate better
explanations
then certain shoulds follow
then we should be open to evidence we
should be willing to allow people to
have an exchange of ideas we should be
logical and reasonable and Etc so in
this case there must be objectively
objective differences between ethical
systems anyone who says oh no we should
not allow any girls to go to school ever
they should be coerced and kept at home
well okay
for many reasons but if you want an
epistemological reason this is a evil
thing to do for civil for them for
individuals but also for civilization
because now you're cutting off progress
and creativity
we want those girls to be able to think
of solutions to problems for them and
everyone else and they can only do that
if they're free and not coerced so there
is a black and white difference between
different ethical systems some are
objectively better than others some
allow for Progress some allow for human
flourishing some reduce coercion and
some seem to try to maximize it and
that's how we can judge it's one nice
heuristic
David Deutsch's fundamental heuristic is
do not destroy the means of error
correction this is the thing that allows
for progress in all areas if you
shut off a means of error correction
then you're doing the wrong thing
because error correction is the very
thing allows you make progress and
improve things to solve problems
a means of error correction is a person
is a means America that's what we are
doing
and so a few coerce Force let alone kill
a person
this is wrong because
destroying the means of error correction
is wrong
and there's a lot of ways to destroy the
means of air creation killing a person
is one but just simply coercing them and
forcing them to do what you want
is wrong morally wrong morally
reprehensible because it's
epistemologically reprehensible
okay so hopefully that yeah
adil's a Hume said
reason is an ought only to be the slave
of the passion saying can never pertain
to any other or office than to serve and
to buy them doesn't appear in a girl I
don't know the question is does a
palparian agree disagree why I don't
know who's this generic properian
um but I would say
um that it depends upon how you
interpret humor I I there was a I think
in the knowledge and ignorance series
that I'm
the in the midst of at least three
quarters of the way through we talk
about Hume and these ideas
and I don't think there's a sharp
distinction here to be made between
reason and the passions this whole idea
of Reason versus emotion and I don't see
that we need to make this sharp
distinction between these two things
you can your passion can be quite
reasonable
um you know any emotion you have you
could be right reasonable to be fearful
of the bear with claws in front of you
fear is a reasonable emotion in that
situation
anger can be a reasonable emotion
happiness can be a reasonable emotion
okay so uh so the reason only the slave
of the passions I don't know about that
why
there are situations where you might be
uh fearful
irrationally
in which case your reason should not be
the slave of the Passions
if you're if you've got a phobia
of an irrational phobia of certain
things okay
um
I happen to be on the the the the eighth
floor right now if I look out it's quite
a distance down to the road below me
um
if you have an irrational fear of
heights
uh then I don't think that that your
reason should be a a slave to that
to to that extent it should be you
should of course not want to jump over
okay that but but in general phobias in
general
um you should not want them to be you
should not want them to be okay you
should want to use your reason to master
your passions in that case so it would
be the other way around so I don't think
the reason always has to be a slave
Advantage sometimes sometimes you you
might want to use your reason to
overcome the passion to overcome the
emotion I think this is but it depends
upon the way in which you interpret
human what he was talking about
um
what is the significant Patrick what is
the significance of the fact that
certain infinities are larger than other
ones
um
I would say to Patrick go to the
beginning of infinity a window on
Infinity
chapter I can't remember and
uh I've made a couple of videos about
this the significance is that some
accountable and some are uncountable
there are certain physical things we'll
talk Multiverse earlier where you can
meaningfully count stuff and then other
senses you can't meaningfully count
stuff my Rough and Ready way of
explaining the difference between these
two things is to say that the integers
are countable one two three four five
six seven eight nine ten you just keep
on Counting them obviously they're
infinite
but the decimals are not okay if I start
at zero and I try and get to one by
counting the decimals I can't even start
it's not countable
so I could say well what about if I go
0.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 well yeah but there's a
decimal smaller than 0.1 0.01 there's a
decimal smaller than that 0.0001 so
there's nowhere to start if I want to
start counting all the decimals between
zero and one I won't get there so this
is a larger Infinity the uncountable
infinity
what's the significance well isn't that
significant some Infinity is a bigger
than others naively naively Infinity is
just Infinity they're all equally
infinite but they're not
some you can't put in one-to-one
correspondence with the others okay so
the even numbers two four six eight nine
ten are in one-to-one correspondence
with the integers one two three four
five zero none you might think okay
don't the integers one two three four
five six seven nine ten have more
numbers
than the even numbers two four six eight
because after all you've taken away the
odd numbers the even numbers there's
less than right no because for any even
number you can assign it an integer okay
one two two to four and so on Okay so
you're not gonna run out of integers or
even numbers in that way so it's one to
one correspondence countable Infinities
versus uncountable infinities
are not that significant
Merry Christmas Richard Martin yeah
um
and lastly Patrick could you explain the
diagonal argument made by Deutsche in
chapter 15 the beginning of infinity
uh why is the hotel novel I won't now I
do go through precisely that argument in
my video on a window into Infinity so
I'll just refer you to that for now but
we've gone to the two hour 20 minute
Mark
um
and people have also asked about
theories of Consciousness well we could
go into that
um and a deal when David describes fun
as explicitly inexplicit and unconscious
ideas taking account of each other
doesn't mean the removal of any barriers
that
um
stop each of them correcting errors in
the others I suppose so yes when you're
having fun it's not like you can put
into words exactly why things are fun
after all fun is this Sensation that you
also have that accompanies engaging in
certain activities so there's this
inexplicit stuff unconscious also
because what you're doing often is not
something you have to think carefully
about you're just in a flow state
but of course there will be the explicit
stuff you're actually doing as well so
for example this uh that I've done right
now has been fun and I can say it
because that's all my explicit words it
seems to have all been explicit but of
course I've had the inexplicit fun which
I can't quite put into words about that
and me talking it's been largely
unconscious it's not like I have to
think about what words coming out of my
um uh mouth next so yeah and we're
correcting errors on all of us I I agree
with that concept of the fun cartoon
until next time yes have a Merry
Christmas
um this was a lot of fun but until I
probably have another podcast out soon
until then bye
foreign